# Results and Discussion

## Scalability, Portability, and Efficiency

The re-implementation of EAGER into Nextflow offers a range of benefits over the
original custom pipeline framework.

Firstly, the new framework provides immediate integration of nf-core/eager into
various job schedulers in POSIX High-Performance-Cluster (HPC) environments,
cloud computing resources, as well as local workstations. This portability
allows users to set up nf-core/eager regardless of the type of computing
infrastructure or cluster size (if applicable), with minimal effort or
configuration. This facilitates reproducibility and therefore maintenance of
standards within the field. Portability is further assisted by the in-built
compatibility with software environments and containers such as Conda
[@url:https://conda.io], Docker [@url:https://www.docker.com] and Singularity
[@url:https://sylabs.io]. These are isolated software 'sandbox' environments
that include all software (with exact versions) required by the pipeline, in a
form that is installable and runnable by users regardless of the set up of their
local software environment. Another major change with nf-core/eager is that the
graphical-user-interface (GUI) set up of an EAGER run is now replaced with a
command-line-interface (CLI) as the primary user interaction mode. This is more
compatible and portable with most HPCs (that may not offer display of a window
system), and is in line with the vast majority of bioinformatics tools. We
therefore believe this will not be a hindrance to new researchers from outside
computational biology. However, a GUI-based pipeline set up is offered via
the nf-core website's Launch page
([https://nf-co.re/launch](https://nf-co.re/launch)), which provides a common
GUI format across multiple pipelines as well as additional robustness checks of
input parameters for those less familiar with CLIs. Typically the output of the
launch functionality is a JSON file that can be used with a nf-core launch
command as a single parameter (as with the original EAGER), however integration with
Nextflow's companion monitoring tool tower.nf [@url:https://tower.nf] also
allows direct submission of pipelines without any command line usage.

Secondly, reproducibility is made easier through the use of 'profiles' that can
define configuration parameters. These profiles can be managed at different
hierarchical levels. HPC-level profiles can specify parameters for the computing
environment (job schedulers, cache locations for containers, maximum memory and
CPU resources etc.), which can be centrally managed to ensure all users of a
group use the same settings. Pipeline-level profiles, specifying parameters for
nf-core/eager itself, allow fast access to routine pipeline-run parameters via a
single flag in the nf-core/eager run command, without having to configure each
new run from scratch. Compared to the original EAGER, which utilised per-FASTQ
XML files with hardcoded filepaths for a specific user's server, nf-core/eager
allows researchers to publish the specific profile used in their runs alongside
their publications, that can also be used by other groups to generate the same
results. Usage of profiles can also reduce mistakes caused by insufficient
'prose' based reporting of program settings that can be regularly found in the
literature. The default nf-core/eager profile uses parameters evaluated in
different aDNA-specific contexts (e.g. in [@doi:10.1186/1471-2164-13-178]), and
will be updated in each new release as new studies are published.

Finally, nf-core/eager provides improved efficiency over the original EAGER
pipeline by replacing the sample-by-sample sequential processing with Nextflow's
asynchronous job parallelisation, whereby multiple pipeline steps and samples
are run in parallel (in addition to natively parallelised pipeline steps). This
is similar to the approach taken by PALEOMIX, however nf-core/eager expands this
by utilising Nextflow's ability to customise the resource parameters
for every job in the pipeline; reducing unnecessary resource allocation that can
occur with unfamiliar users to each step of an NGS data processing pipeline.
This is particularly pertinent given the increasing use of centralised HPCs or
cloud computing that often use per-hour cost calculations.

## Updated Workflow

nf-core/eager follows a similar structural foundation to the original version of
EAGER and partially to PALEOMIX. Given Illumina short-read FASTQ and/or BAM
files and a reference FASTA file, this can be split into four main stages:

1. Pre-processing
   - Sequencing quality control: FastQC
     [@url:https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc]
   - Sequencing artefact clean-up (merging, adapter clipping): AdapterRemoval2
     [@doi:10.1186/s13104-016-1900-2]
   - Pre-processing statistics generation
2. Mapping and post-processing
   - Alignment against reference genome: BWA aln and mem
     [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp324; @doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp698,
     @arxiv:1303.3997], CircularMapper [@doi:10.1186/s13059-016-0918-z], Bowtie2
     [@doi:10.1038/nmeth.1923]
   - Mapping quality filtering: SAMtools [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp352]
   - PCR duplicate removal: DeDup [@doi:10.1186/s13059-016-0918-z], Picard
     MarkDuplicates [@doi:10.1101/gr.107524.110]
   - Mapping statistics generation: PreSeq [@doi:10.1038/nmeth.2375], Qualimap2
     [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btv566]
3. aDNA evaluation and modification
   - Damage profiling: DamageProfiler [@doi:10.1101/2020.10.01.322206]
   - aDNA reads selection: PMDtools [@doi:10.1073/pnas.1318934111]
   - Damage removal/Base trimming: Bamutils[@doi:10.1101/gr.176552.114]
4. Variant calling and consensus sequence generation: GATK
   [@doi:10.1101/gr.107524.110], ANGSD [@doi:10.1186/s12859-014-0356-4],
   VCF2Genome [@doi:10.1186/s13059-016-0918-z]

In nf-core/eager, all tools originally used in EAGER have been updated to their
latest versions, as available on Bioconda [@doi:10.1038/s41592-018-0046-7] and
Conda-forge [@url:https://conda-forge.github.io], to ensure widespread
accessibility and stability of utilised tools. The MapDamage2 (for damage
profile generation) [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btt193] and Schmutzi (for
mitochondrial contamination estimation) [@doi:10.1186/s13059-015-0776-0] methods
have not been carried over to nf-core/eager, the first because a more performant
successor method is now available (DamageProfiler), and the latter because a
stable release of the method could not be migrated to Bioconda. We anticipate
that there will be an updated version of Schmutzi in the near future that will
allow us to integrate the method again in nf-core/eager. As an alternative,
estimation of human _nuclear_ contamination is now offered through
ANGSD [@doi:10.1186/s12859-014-0356-4]. Support for the Bowtie2 aligner
[@doi:10.1038/nmeth.1923] has been updated to have default settings optimised
for aDNA [@doi:10.3389/fevo.2020.00105].

New tools to the basic workflow include fastp
[@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bty560] for the removal of 'poly-G' sequencing
artefacts that are common in 2-colour Illumina sequencing machines (such as the
increasingly popular NextSeq and NovaSeq platforms
[@url:https://sequencing.qcfail.com/articles/illumina-2-colour-chemistry-can-overcall-high-confidence-g-bases/]).
For variant calling, we have now included FreeBayes [@arxiv:1207.3907] as an
alternative to the human-focused GATK tools, and have also added pileupCaller
[@url:https://github.com/stschiff/sequenceTools] for generation of genotyping
formats commonly utilised in ancient human population analysis. We have also
maintained the possibility of using the now unsupported GATK UnifiedGenotyper,
as the supported replacement GATK HaplotypeCaller performs _de novo_ assembly
around possible variants; something that may not be suitable for low-coverage
aDNA data.

![Simplified schematic of the nf-core/eager workflow pipeline. Green filled
bubbles indicate new functionality added over the original EAGER
pipeline.](images/eager2_workflow.png){#fig:workflow-schematic width="90%"}

Additional functionality tailored for ancient bacterial genomics includes
integration of a SNP alignment generation tool, MultiVCFAnalyzer
[@doi:10.1038/nature13591], which allows assessment of cross-mapping levels from
different related taxa to a reference genome - a common challenge in ancient
bacterial genome reconstruction [@doi:10.1146/annurev-genom-091416-035526]. The
output SNP alignment FASTA file can then be used for downstream analyses such as
phylogenetic tree construction. Simple coverage statistics of particular
annotations (e.g. genes) of an input reference is offered by bedtools
[@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btq033], which can be used in cases such as for
providing initial indications of functional differences between ancient
bacterial strains (as in [@doi:10.1016/j.cub.2017.10.025]). When using a human
reference genome, nf-core/eager can also give estimates of the
relative coverage on the X and Y chromosomes with with Sex.DetERRmine,
which can be used to infer the biological sex of a given individual.
[@doi:10.1038/s41467-018-07483-5]. A dedicated 'endogenous DNA' calculator
(endorS.py) is also included, to provide a percentage estimate of the sequenced
reads matching the reference from the total number of reads sequenced per
library.

Given the large amount of sequencing often required to yield sufficient genome
coverage from aDNA data, palaeogeneticists tend to use multiple (differently
treated) libraries, and/or merge data from multiple sequencing runs of each
library or even samples. The original EAGER pipeline could only run a single
library at a time, and in these contexts required significant manual user input
in merging different FASTQ or BAM files. A major upgrade in nf-core/eager is
that the new pipeline supports automated processing of complex sequencing
strategies for many samples, similar to PALEOMIX. This is facilitated by the
optional use of a simple table table (in TSV format, a format more commonly
used in wet-lab stages of data generation, compared to PALEOMIX's YAML format), which
includes file paths and additional metadata such as sample name, library name,
sequencing lane, colour chemistry, and UDG treatment. This allows simultaneous
processing and appropriate merging and treatment of heterogeneous data from
multiple sequencing runs and/or library types.

The original EAGER  and PALEOMIX pipelines required users to look through many
independent output directories and files to make full assessment of their
sequencing data. This has now been replaced in nf-core/eager with a much more
extensive MultiQC report [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btw354]. This tool
aggregates the log files of every supported tool into a single interactive
report, and assists users in making a fuller assessment of their sequencing and
analysis runs. We have developed a corresponding MultiQC module for every tool
used by nf-core/eager, where possible, to enable comprehensive evaluation of all
stages of the pipeline.

An overview of the entire pipeline is shown in Figure {@fig:workflow-schematic},
and a tabular comparison of functionality between EAGER, PALEOMIX and
nf-core/eager in Table {@tbl:pipeline-comparison}.

We have further extended the functionality of the pipeline by adding ancient
metagenomic analysis, to reconstruct the wider taxonomic content of a sample. We
have added the possibility to screen all off-target reads (not mapped to the
reference genome) with two metagenomic profilers: MALT [@doi:10.1101/050559;
@doi:10.1038/s41559-017-0446-6] and Kraken2 [@doi:10.1186/s13059-019-1891-0], in
parallel to the mapping to a given reference genome (typically of the host).
Characterisation of properties of authentic aDNA from metagenomic MALT
alignments is carried out with the HOPS pipeline
[@doi:10.1186/s13059-019-1903-0]. This functionality can be used either for
microbiome screening or putative pathogen detection. Ancient metagenomic studies
sometimes include comparative samples from living individuals
[@doi:10.1186/s40168-019-0717-3)]. To support open data, whilst respecting
personal data privacy, nf-core/eager includes a 'FASTQ host removal' script
which creates raw FASTQ files, but with all reads successfully mapped to the
reference genome removed. This allows safe upload of metagenomic non-host
sequencing data to public repositories after removal of identifiable (human)
data, for example for microbiome studies.

To demonstrate the simultaneous genomic analysis of human DNA and metagenomic
screening for putative pathogens, as well as improved results reporting, we
re-analysed data from Barquera et al. 2020 [@doi:10.1016/j.cub.2020.04.002], who
performed a multi-discipline study of three 16th-century individuals excavated
from a mass burial site in Mexico City. The authors reported genetic results
showing sufficient on-target human DNA (>1%) with typical aDNA damage (>20% C to
T reference mismatches in the first base of the 5' ends of reads) for downstream
population-genetic analysis and Y-chromosome coverage indicative that the three
individuals were genetically male. In addition, one individual (Lab ID: SJN003)
contained DNA suggesting a possible infection by _Treponema pallidum_, a species
with a variety of strains that can cause diseases such as syphilis, bejel and
yaws, and a second individual (Lab ID: SJN001) displayed reads similar to the
Hepatitis B virus. Both results were confirmed via in-solution enrichment
approaches.

We were able to successfully replicate the human and pathogen screening results
in a single run of nf-core/eager. Mapping to the human reference genome (hs37d5)
with BWA aln and binning of off-target reads with MALT to the NCBI Nucleotide
database (2017-10-26) yielded the same results of all individuals having a
biological sex of male, as well as the same frequency of C to T miscoding
lesions and short fragment lengths (both characteristic of true aDNA).
Metagenomic hits to both pathogens from the same individuals that also yielded
complete genomes in the original publication, were also detected. Both results
and other processing statistics were identified via a single interactive MultiQC
report, excerpts of which can be seen in Figure {@fig:dual-human-pathogen}.  The
full interactive report can be seen in the supplementary information.

![Sections of a MultiQC report (v1.10dev) with the outcome of simultaneous human
DNA and microbial pathogen screening with nf-core/eager, including **A**
Sex.DetERRmine output of biological sex assignment with coverages on X and Y
being half of that of autosomes; indicative of male individuals, and **B** HOPS
output with positive detection of both _Treponema pallidum_ and Hepatitis B
virus reads. Other taxa in HOPS output represent typical environmental contamination and
oral commensal microbiota found in teeth. Data was shotgun data from Barquera et al. 2020
[@doi:10.1016/j.cub.2020.04.002], and replicated results here were originally
verified in the publication via enrichment methods. The full interactive reports
for both MultiQC v1.9 and v1.10 (see methods) can be seen in the supplementary
information.](images/dual_humanpathogen_exportedmqc_base_edit.png){#fig:dual-human-pathogen
width="70%"}

## Accessibility

Alongside the interactive MultiQC report, we have written extensive
documentation on all parts of running and interpreting the output of the
pipeline. Given that a large fraction of aDNA researchers come from fields
outside computational biology, and thus may have limited computational training,
we have written documentation [@url:https://nf-co.re/eager/docs] that also gives
guidance on how to interpret each section of the report specifically in the
context of high-throughput sequencing data and aDNA. This includes best
practice or expected output schematic images that are published under CC-BY
licenses to allow for use in other training material (an example can be seen in
Figure {@fig:doc-image-example}). We hope this open-access resource will make
the study of aDNA more accessible to researchers new to the field, by providing
practical guidelines on how to evaluate characteristics and effects of aDNA on
downstream analyses.

![Example schematic images of pipeline output documentation that can assist new
users in the interpretation of high-throughput sequencing aDNA
processing.](images/fastqc_adapter_content.png){#fig:doc-image-example
width="70%"}

The development of nf-core/eager in Nextflow and the nf-core initiative will
also improve open-source development, while ensuring the high quality of
community contributions to the pipeline. While Nextflow is written primarily in
Groovy, the Nextflow DSL simplifies a number of concepts to an intermediate
level that bioinformaticians without Java/Groovy experience can easily access
(regardless of own programming language experience). Furthermore, Nextflow
places ubiquitous and more widely known command-line interfaces, such as bash,
in a prominent position within the code, rather than custom Java code and
classes (as in EAGER v1). We hope this will motivate further bug fixes and
feature contributions from the community, to keep the pipeline state-of-the-art
and ensure a longer life-cycle. This will also be supported by the open and
active nf-core community who provide general guidance and advice on developing
Nextflow and nf-core pipelines.

## Comparisons with other pipelines

We compared pipeline run-times of the three pipelines to show that the new
implementation of nf-core/eager is equivalent or more efficient than EAGER or
PALEOMIX. While similar pipelines designed for aDNA have also been released,
such as ATLAS [@doi:10.1101/105346] or HOPS [@doi:10.1186/s13059-019-1903-0],
these generally have been designed with specific contexts in mind (e.g. human
population genetics or pathogen screening) and do not include many of the
preprocessing steps required for analysing NGS data.

| Category        | Functionality                              | EAGER | PALEOMIX | nf-core/eager |
|-----------------|--------------------------------------------|:-----:|:--------:|:-------------:|
| Infrastructure  | Reproducible software environments offered | ✓     | ✗        | ✓             |
|                 | HPC scheduler integration                  | ✗     | ✗        | ✓             |
|                 | Cloud computing integration                | ✗     | ✗        | ✓             |
|                 | Per-process resource optimisation          | ✗     | ~        | ✓             |
|                 | Pipeline-step parallelisation              | ✗     | ✓        | ✓             |
|                 | Command line set up                        | ✗     | ✓        | ✓             |
|                 | GUI set up                                 | ✓     | ✗        | ✓             |
| Preprocessing   | Sequencing lane merging                    | ✓     | ✓        | ✓             |
|                 | Sequencing quality control                 | ✓     | ✗        | ✓             |
|                 | Sequencing artefact removal                | ✗     | ✗        | ✓             |
|                 | Adapter clipping/read merging              | ✓     | ✓        | ✓             |
|                 | Post-processing sequencing QC              | ✗     | ✗        | ✓             |
| Alignment       | Reference mapping                          | ✓     | ✓        | ✓             |
|                 | Reference mapping statistics               | ✓     | ✓        | ✓             |
|                 | Multi-reference mapping                    | ✗     | ✓        | ✗             |
| Postprocessing  | Mapped reads filtering                     | ✓     | ✓        | ✓             |
|                 | Off-target metagenomic profiling           | ✗     | ✗        | ✓             |
|                 | Off-target metagenomic authentication      | ✗     | ✗        | ✓             |
|                 | Library complexity estimation              | ✓     | ✗        | ✓             |
|                 | Duplicate removal                          | ✓     | ✗        | ✓             |
|                 | BAM merging                                | ✗     | ✓        | ✓             |
| Authentication  | Damage read filtering                      | ✓     | ✗        | ✓             |
|                 | Contamination estimation (Human)           | ✓     | ✗        | ✓             |
|                 | Biological sex determination (Human)       | ✗     | ✗        | ✓             |
|                 | Genome coverage estimation                 | ✓     | ✓        | ✓             |
|                 | Damage calculation                         | ✓     | ✓        | ✓             |
|                 | Damage rescaling                           | ✗     | ✓        | ~             |
| Downstream      | SNP Calling/Genotyping                     | ✓     | ~        | ✓             |
|                 | Consensus sequence generation              | ✓     | ~        | ✓             |
|                 | Regions of interest statistics             | ~     | ✓        | ✓             |

Table: Comparison of pipeline functionality of common ancient DNA processing
pipelines. Tick represents full functionality, tilde represents partial
functionality, and cross represents not implemented. {#tbl:pipeline-comparison}

We ran each pipeline on a subset of Viking-age cod (_Gadus morhua_) genomic data
from Star et al. 2017 [@doi:10.1073/pnas.1710186114]. This data was originally run using
PALEOMIX, was re-run here as described but with the latest version of PALEOMIX (v1.2.14), and with
settings for the other two pipelines as close as possible to the original paper
(EAGER with v1.92.33, and nf-core/EAGER with v2.2.0dev, commit
830c22d448441e5e19508c198f530a7656c9f25d). The respective benchmarking
environment and exact pipeline run settings can be seen in the Methods and
Supplementary Information. Two samples each with three Illumina paired-end
sequencing runs were analysed, with adapter clipping and merging
(AdapterRemoval), mapping (BWA aln), duplicate removal (Picard's MarkDuplicates) and
damage profiling (PALEOMIX: mapDamage2, EAGER and nf-core/EAGER: DamageProfiler)
steps being performed. We ran the commands for each tool sequentially, but
repeated these batches of commands 10 times - to account for variability in the
cloud service's IO connection. Run times were measured using the GNU time tool
(v1.7).

|Pipeline                  |Version  |Environment  |real        |sys        |user          |
|:-------------------------|:--------|:------------|:-----------|:----------|:-------------|
|nf-core-eager (optimised) |2.2.0dev |singularity  |105.6 ± 4.6 |13.6 ± 0.7 |1593 ± 79.7   |
|PALEOMIX (optimised)      |1.2.14   |conda        |130.6 ± 8.7 |12 ± 0.7   |1820.2 ± 36.9 |
|nf-core-eager             |2.2.0dev |singularity  |209.2 ± 4.4 |11 ± 0.9   |1407.7 ± 30.2 |
|EAGER                     |1.92.37  |singularity  |224.2 ± 4.9 |22.9 ± 0.3 |1736.3 ± 70.2 |
|PALEOMIX                  |1.2.14   |conda        |314.6 ± 2.9 |10.7 ± 1   |1506.7 ± 14   |

Table: Comparison of run times in minutes between three ancient DNA pipelines.
PALEOMIX and nf-core/eager have additional runs with 'optimised' parameters with
fairer computational resources matching modern multi-threading strategies.
Values represent mean and standard deviation of run times in minutes, calculated
from the output of the GNU time tool. .Real: real time, System: cumulative CPU system-task times,
User: cumulative CPU time of all tasks. {#tbl:benchmarking-runtimes}.

A summary of runtimes of the benchmarking tests can be seen in Table
{@tbl:benchmarking-runtimes}. nf-core/eager showed fastest runtimes across all
three time metrics when running on default parameters. This
highlights the improved efficiency of nf-core/eager's asynchronous processing
system and per-process resource customisation (here represented by nf-core/eager
defaults designed for typical HPC set ups).

As a more realistic demonstration of modern computing multi-threading set ups,
we also re-ran PALEOMIX with the flag --max-bwa-threads set to 4 (listed in
Table {@tbl:benchmarking-runtimes} as 'optimised'), which is equivalent to a
single BWA aln process of nf-core/eager. This resulted in a much faster run-time
than that of default nf-core/eager, due to the approach of PALEOMIX of mapping
each lane of a library separately, whereas nf-core/eager will map all lanes of a
single library merged together. Therefore, given that each library was split
across three lanes, increasing the threads of BWA aln to 4 resulted in 12 per
library, whereas nf-core/eager only gave 4 (by default) for a single BWA aln process
of one library. While the PALEOMIX approach is valid, we opted to retain the
per-library mapping as it is often the longest running step of high-throughput
sequenced genome-mapping pipelines, and it prevents flooding of HPC scheduling
systems with many long-running jobs. Secondly, if users regularly use multi-lane
data, due to nf-core/eager's fine-granularity control, they can simply modify
nf-core/eager's BWA aln process resources via config files to account for this. When
we optimised parameters that were used for BWA aln multi-threading and multiple
lanes to the same number of BWA aln threads as the optimised PALEOMIX run,
nf-core/eager again displayed faster runtimes.  All metrics including mapped
reads, percentage on-target, mean depth coverage and mean read lengths across
all pipelines were extremely similar across all pipelines and replicates (see
methods {@tbl:benchmarking-results}).
